abbas, father
abbatis, abbot
abbatia, abbey
abduco, lead
abeo, go
abeo, digress
abscido, cut
absconditus, hidden
absens, absentis
absorbeo, swallow
absque, 
abstergo, wipe
absum, be
abundans, abundant
abundantia, abundance
abutor, make
abutor, use
ac, and
accedo, approach
accendo, kindle
acceptus, welcome
accipio, consider
accommodo, adjust
accusator, accusor
accuso, accuse
acer, sharp
acerbitas, harshness
acerbus, bitter
acervus, a
acidus, sharp
acies, keenness
acquiro, acquire
acsi, as
adamo, fall
adaugeo, make
ad, to
addo, give
adduco, lead
adeo, such
adeo, approach
adeptio, attainment
adepto, obtain
affectus, influenced
adfero, cause
affero, cause
adficio, affect
affligo, injure
adhaero, hang
adhuc, till
adicio, direct
adimpleo, fulfill 
adipiscor, come
adiuvo, help
administratio, giving
admiratio, wonder
admiror, wonder
admitto, admit
admoneo, admonish
admonitio, warning
admoveo, move
adnuo, nod
adopto, wish
adsidue, continuously
adstringo, tight
adsuesco , grow
adsum, assist
adsumo, take
adulatio, fawning
adulescens, young
adulescentia, youth
aduro, set
adveniat, down
advenio, come
adverto, turn
advoco, summon
edificium, building
aeger, sick
egresco, fall
aegresco, become
aegretudo, sickness
egrotatio, sickness
aegrus, ill
eneus, made
equitas, justice
equus, calm
estas, summer
estivus, pertaining
estus, heat
aetas, an
eternus, eternal
ager, farm
aggero, make
aggredior, go
agnitio, recognition
agnosco, know
agnosco, acknowledge
agnosco, recognize
ago, spend
ait, he
alienus, somebody
alii, some
aliqua, some
aliquando, at 
aliqui, some
aliquid, someone
aliquis, someone
aliquot, some
aliquotiens, some
alius, other
allatus, having
alo, nourish
alter, the other
altus, high
alveus, hollow
amaritudo, bitterness
ambitus, border
ambulo, walk
amicitia, friendship
amiculum, cloak
amicus, friend
amissio, loss
amita, father
amitto, dismiss
amitto, send
amo, love
amor, love
amoveo, move
amplexus, an
amplitudo, size
amplus, large
ancilla, maidservant
angelus, angel
angulus, corner
angustus, narrow
animadverto, turn
animi, at
animus, character
annus, year
anser, goose
antiquus, ancient
aperio, uncover
aperte, openly
apparatus, equipment
appareo, become
appello, call
appono, appoint
appono, place
appositus, placed
approbo, approve
apto, fit
aptus, fitted
aptus, suitable
aqua, water
ara, altar
aranea, spider
arbitro, witness
arbor, tree
arbustum, vinyard
arbustus, planted
arca, chest
arceo, shut
arcesso, accerso
arcus, bow
argentum, silver
argumentum, proof
arguo, show
arma, arms
armarium, cupboard
armo, provide
aro, plow
ars, artis
articulus, 
artificiose, skillfully
artificiosus, skillful
arto, press
arx , arcis
ascisco, receive
asper, rough
asperitas, roughness
aspicio, look
asporto, carry
assentator, flatterer
astrum, star
at, but
atavus, great
ater atra atrum, dark
atqui, still
atrocitas, hashness
atrox, terrible
attero, destroy
attero, weaken
attollo, raise
attonbitus, frantic
auctor, author
auctoritas, authority
auctus, growth
audacia, boldness
audacter, audaciter
audax, bold
audentia, boldness
audeo, 
audio, hear
auditor, hearer
aufero, carry
aureus, golden
auris, ear
aurum, gold
aut, either
autem, moreover
autus, increase 
auxilium, aid
avaritia, avarice
avarus, greedy
aveho, carry
averto, turn
Avesniis, 
avoco, call
baiulus, porter
balbus, stammering
barba, beard
bardus, stupid
basium, kiss
beatus, blessed
bellicus, martial
bellum, war
bellus, beautiful
bene, melior
beneficium, benefit
benevolentia, benevolence
benigne, kindly 
bestia, animal
bibo, drink
bis, twice
blandior, flatter
blanditia, blandishments 
bonus , good
melior , good
bonum, good
optimus, good
bos, cow
brevis, short
brevitas, shortness
breviter, briefly 
cado, fall
caecus, blind
caelestis, heavenly
caelum, sky
caelis, heavens
caelo, heaven
calamitas, calamity
calamus, anything
calcar, sput
calco, tread
calculus, pebble
callide, skillfully
callidus, clever 
campana, bell
candidus, bright
canis, dog
canes, dogs
canonicus, canonical
canonus, canon
canto, sing
capillus, hair
capio, seize
capitulus, chapter
capto, grab
caput, head
carbo , carbon
carbonis, carbon
carcer, prison
careo, lack
caries, rottenness
cariosus, rotten
caritas, dearness
carmen, song
carpo, pluck
carus, dear
casso, bring
caste, purely 
casus, accident
catena, chain
caterva, crowd
catervatim, in 
cattus, cat
cauda, tail 
causa, cause
causa, case
caute cautim, cautiously
cautela, caution
caveo cavi cautum, beware
cavus, hole
cedo, go
celebrer, famous
celebrus, abounding
celer, quick
celeritas, speed
celeriter, rapidly
celo, hide
cena, dinner
cenaculum, garret
ceno, dine
censura, judgement
centum, hundred
cerno, separate
cernuus, falling
certo, contend
certus, undoubted
certus, settled
cervus, stag
cetera, for
ceteri, the
ceterum, moreover
ceterus, the
charisma, gift
chirographum, autograph
cibo, food
cibus, food
cicuta, hemlock
cimentarius, mason
ciminatio, accusation
ciminosus, reproachful
cinis cineris, ashes
circumvenio, come
circumvenio, beset
cito: quickly, rapidly
civilis, civil
civis, citizen
civitas, state
clam, secretly
clamo, call
clamor, loud
claro, make
clarus, clear
claudeo, limp
claudo , confine
claudus, lame
claustrum, bolt
clementia, indulgence
clibanus, oven
coaegresco, become
coepi, started 
coerceo, surround
cogito, think
cognatus, kinsman
cognomen, surname
cognosco, examine
cogo, coegi
cogo, coegi
cohaero, adhere 
cohero, adhere 
cohesi, adhere 
cohesum, adhere
cohibeo, confine
cohors, troop
cohortor, encourage
colligo, gather
colloco, place
collum, neck
cultum, cultivate
color, color
coloratus, colored
coloro, color
coma, hair
combibo, drink
comburo, burn
comedo, eat
comedi, eat
comesum, eat
comitis, companion
cometes, comet
cometissa, countess
comis, courteous
comitatus, train
comiter, courteously
comitto, entrust
commemoro, remind
commeo, go
commessatio, onis
comminor, threaten
comminuo, scatter
comminus, hand
commisceo, intermingle
commissum, undertaking
commodo, make
commodum, suitable
commodum, convenience
commoneo, remind
commoneo, remember
commoneo, impress
commoveo, move
communis, common
comparo, compare
compatior, suffer
compello, drive
comperio, disclose
comperte, on
compes, compedis
compes, fetters
competo, fit
complectus, embrace
compleo, finish
compleo, fill
compono, put
compositio, composition
compositus, orderly
comprehendo, seize
comprehendo, grasp
comprehendo, embrace
comprobo, approve
comprovincialis, born
comptus, hairband
conatus, exertion
concedo, concede
concepta, measures
concero, connect
concido, fall
concilium, council
concipio, take
concisus, cut
concito, move
conculco, tread
concupiscentia, avarice
concupisco, covet
concutio, shake
concutio, shake
condico, agree
conduco, hire
confero, bring
confero, discuss
confestim, immediately
confido, have
confiteor, confess
conforto, strengthen
confugo, flee
congregatio, assembly
congrego, gather
congruus, agreeing
conicio, hurl
coniecto, throw
conitor, press
coniuratio, conspiracy
coniuratus, conspirator
coniuro, take
conor, undertake
conqueror, complain
conscendo, ascend
conscientia, conscience
conscindo, tear
conscius, conscious
conservo, preserve
considero, look
consido, set
consilio, intentionally
consilium, deliberation
consilium, advice 
consisto, take
consitor, sower
conspergo, sprinkle
conspicio, catch
constans, steady
constanter, steadily
constituo, set
constituo, arrange
constrictum, bind
constructum, construct
constupator, ravisher
constupro, ravish
consuasor, advisor
consuefacio, accustom
consuesco, accustom
consueta, customary
consuetudo, custom
consulatio, deliberation
consulo, reflect
consulto, ask
consulto, consider
consultum, decree
consummatio, completion
consummo, add
consumo, spend
consuo, sew
consurgo, stand
contabesco, waste
contactus,uching
contagio contagium, contagion
contamino, pollute
contego, cover
contemno, think
contemplatio, survey
contemplor, mark
contemptim, contemptuously
contemptio, scorn
contemptus, despised
contendo, compare
contendo, contend
contendo, assert
contente, eagerly
contentus, contented
contentus, strained 
contineo, touch
contineo, keep
contineo, hold
contineo, restrain 
continuus, connected
contrado, deliver
contraho, draw
contristo, make
contristo, sadden
conturbo, confuse
conventus, coming
conversatio, way
converto, turn
convoco, call
copia, abundance
copiae copie, supplies
copiose, fully 
cornu, horn
corona, crown
corpus, body
correptius, more
corripio, seize
corroboro, strengthen
corrumpo, break
corruo, fall 
cotidie, daily
crapula, wine 
creator, creator
creatura, creature
creber, thick
crebro, repeatedly
credo, believe
creo, create
creptio, taking
crepusculum, dusk
creta, chalk
cribro, sift
cribrum, sieve
crinis, hair
crinitus, long
crucio, torture
crudelis, cruel
cruentus, make
cruentus, bloody
crustulum, pastry
crux crucis, cross
cubicularis, pertaining
cubicularius, bed
cubiculum, bedroom
cubitum, reire
cubo, lie
cui, whom
culpa, fault
culpo, blame
cultellus, knife
cultura, cultivation
cunabula, cradle
cunae, nest
cunctatio, delay
cunctator, delayer
cunctor, delay
cunctus, all
cupiditas, ambition
cupido, passion
cupio, desire
cuppedia, delicacies
cupressus, cypress
cur, why
cura, management
curatio, attention
curator, guardian
curia, court
curiositas, curiosity
curiosus, careful
curis quris, a
curo, care
curriculum, lap
currus, cart
cursim, hastily
cursito, run
curso, run
cursor, runner
cursus, course
curto, shorten
curtus, shortened
curvo, bend
curvus, arched
custodia, protection
custodiae, guards
custos, keeper
damnatio, condemnation
damno, condemn
dapifer, seneschal
de, from
debeo, owe
debilito, weaken
debitoribus, debtors
decens, decenter
decerno, decide
decerto, contend
decet, it
decimus, tenth
decipio, ensnare
decor, beauty
decoro, beautify
decorus, beautiful
decretum, decree
decumbo, fall
dedecor, unseemly
dedecus, shame
dedico, dedicate
deduco, lad
defaeco, cleanse
defendo, defend
defero, hand
defessus, weary
defetiscor, grow
deficio, fail
defigo, fasten
defleo, weep
defleo, bewail
defluo, flow
defluo, flow
defungo, discharge
degenero, cause
degenero, be
degero, pass
degusto, taste
deinde, next
delectatio, delight
delecto, attract
delego, transfer 
delibero, consider
delicate, luxuriously 
deliciae, allurements
delinquo, fail
deludo, mock 
demergo, sink
demitto, set
demo, take
demonstro, indicate
demoror, loiter
demulceo, stroke
demum, at
denego, refuse
denique, at
denuncio, declare
denuntio, announce
denuo, anew
deorsum, downwards
depereo, perish
depono, put
depopulo, lay
deporto, carry
depraedor, plunder
deprecator, intercessor
deprecor, entreat
deprimo, press
depromo, take
depulso, push
deputo, count
derelinquo, forsake
derideo, laugh
deripio, tear
desidero, long
desidiosus, lazy
desino, leave
desino, cease
desipio, act
desolo, leave
desparatus, given
despecto, overlook
despero, have
despero, be
despiciens, contemptuous
despicio, look
desposco, demand
destinatus, resolute
destituo, set
detego, uncover
determino, fix
detineo, hold
detrimentum, damage
deus, god
devenio, come
devito, avoid
devoco, call
devoveo, consecrate
dexter, right
dextera, the
diabolus, devil
dico, speak
dictata, things
dictator, dictator
dictito, say
dicto, say
didicerat, 
didico, be
dido, separate
dies, day
diffama, spread
differo, spread
differo, delay
differtus, stuffed
difficilis, difficult
difficultas, difficulty
digestor, arranger
dignitas, merit
dignosco, distinguish 
digredior, depart
digressio, separation
digressus, separation
dilabor, break
dilato, spread
dilgenter, attentively
diligens, diligent
diligentia, diligence
diligo, choose
diluculo, dawn
dimidium, half
dimitto, break
dimittimus, forgive
dimmette, forgive
directus, plain
diripio, tear
diripio, separate
dirunitas, long
diruo, demolish 
discidium, separation
discipulus, disciple
disco, learn
discrepo, differ
dispono, arrange
disputatio, debate
disputo, discuss
dissero, examine
dissimilis, unlike
dissimulo, ignore
dissimulo, conceal
dissolutus, lax
distinguo, mark
distribuo, distribute
districtus, strict
dito, enrich
diu, long ago
diutinus, lasting
diutius, longer
diuturnus, lasting
diversus, different
dives, rich
divinitus, divine
divinus, divine
divitiae, riches
do, give 
dare, give 
dedi, give 
datum, give
doceo, instruct 
docui, instruct 
doctum, instruct
doctor, teacher
doctrina, doctrine
doctus, taught
dolens, painfully
doleo, suffer
dolor, pain
dolose, slyly
dolosus, crafty
dolus, fraud
domesticus, domestic
domina, lady
dominatus, rule
dominus, master 
domino, master
domito, tame
domus, house
donec, up
donum, gift
dormio, sleep
dubito, doubt
dubium, doubt
duco, lead
duco, draw
duco, charm
duco, calculate
dulcedo, sweetness
dulcidine, sweetly
dulcis, sweet
dulcitudo, dum
dumtaxat, at most
duo, two
duro, last
durus, hard
Dusiol petram, 
dux, leader
ducis, leader
eatenus, so far
ebullio, boil
ecclesia, church
econtra, against
ecquando, ever
edico, announce
editio, announcement
edo, eat
edi, eat
essum, eat
edoceo, inform
educo, draw
effectus, doing
effero, carry 
extuli, carry 
elatum, carry
effervo, boil
efficio, do
effringo, break
effundo, pour
egenus, destitute
egeo, need
ego, I
egredior, exit
eicio, eject
elatus, puff
electus, chosen
elementum, first
elemosina, alms
eligo, pick
eloquens, eloquent
eloquentia, eloquence
eluo, wash
eluvies, a
eluvio, inundation
emanio, flow
emendo, amend
emercor, buy
emerio, obtain
emineo, stand
eminor, threaten
eminus, at
emiror, wonder
emo, buy
emi, buy
emptum, buy
emoveo, move
emptio, a
enim, for
enumero, count
eo, go
ire, go 
itum, go
episcopalis, episcopal
episcopus, bishop
epistula, letter
epulo, sumptuous
epulor, feast
eques, horseman
equitatus, cavalry
equus, horse
erepo, creep
erga,  about
ergo, therefore
erogo, pay
erogo, pay
erro, wander
error, error
erubesco, blush
erudio, instruct
eruo, dig
esurio, be
es, you are
est, is
et, and
etenim, for
etiam, also
etsi, although
evenio, come
eventus, consequence
everto, turn
evito, shun
evoco, draw
ex, from
exaequo, equal
exequo, equal
excedo, leave 
excellentia, excellence
excessum, departure
excipio, except
excito, call
exclamo, shout
excludo, shut
excolo, honor
excrucio, torment
excusatio, excuse
excuso, exempt
exemplar, model
exemplum, pattern
exerceo, train
exercitus, army
exertus, tested
exesto, extra
exheredo, disinherit
exheres, disinherited
exhibeo exibeo, produce
exhibeo, show
exhilaro, make
exhorresco, be
exigo, drive
exigo, complete
exilis, thin
eximietate, uncommonness
eximius, extraordinary
eximo, free
exinde, thence
exitiabilis, fatal
exitialis, fatal
exitosus, fatal
exitium, destruction
exitus, going
exordium, the
exorior, rise
exoro, prevail
exorsus, begun
expedio, release
expello, drive
expers, wanting
expetens, desirous
expeto, fall
expeto, demand
expilatio, plundering
expiscor, fish
expleo, make
expleo, fill
expletum, fill
expletio, satisfying
explicatus, explanation
explico, unfold
expono, set
expositus, open
expostulo, demand
expugno, capture
exquisitus, sought
exequor, follow
exsequor, maintain
exsequor, execute
exertus, project
exsilium, exile
exspecto, look
exsto, stand
externus, outer
extollo, praise
extollo, lift
extorqueo, twist
extra, outside
extremus, outermost
exturbo, drive
exulto, exult
exuro, exussum
exustio, burning
fabula, fable
facile, easily
facilis, easy
facillimus, easiest
facina, bad
facio, sacrifice
facio, give
factum, deed
facultas, power
facundia, facultas
facunditas, fertility
fenum, hay
falsus, false
fama, talk
familia, family
familiaris, belonging
famulatus, servitude
famulus, servant
fas, divine
fateor, confess
fatigo, worry
fatum, fate
fautor, favorer
faveo, help
feculentia, dregs
fefello, be
feliciter, happily
felix felicis, lucky
femina, woman
fenestra, window
fere, almost
feretrum, bier
feritas, wildness
ferme, fere
ferrum, iron
ferus, fierce
festinatio, speed
festino, hasten
festinus, hastening
feteo, have
fiat, becomes
ficus, fig
fidelis, faithful
fidelitas, fidelity
fidens, confident
fides, trust
fides, promise
fiducia, confidence
filia, daughter
filius, son
fimus, dung
fines, boundaries
finis, end
finitimus, neighboring
fio, fieri
firmo, assert
firmus, firm
flamma, flame
flatus, blowing
flax, falcis
fleo, weep
fluctus, billow
flumen, river
fluo, flow
fodio, prick
fore, forem
forensis, legal
forma, shape
formica, ant
formo, shape
fors, chance
fortis, chance
forsit, perhaps
forsitan, perhaps
fortasse, perhaps
forte, by
fortis, strong
fortiter, strongly
fortitudo, physical
fortuna, fortune
fortunate, fortunately
fortunatus, fortunate
forum, market
foveo, cherish
frango, break
frater, brother
frendo, gnash
frendo, gnash
frequentatio, frequency
frequentia, population
frequento, crowd
frigus, cold
frons, forehead
fructuarius, fruitful
fructus, fruit
frugalitas, frugality
frumentum, grain
fruor, have
frustra, in
frux, frugi
fuga, flight
fugio, flee
fugitivus, fugitive
fugo, put
fulcio, support
fulgeo, shine
fultus, supporter
fundo, pour
fundo, defeat
funis, rope
furibundus, raging
furor, madness
furs, thief
furtificus, thievish
furtim, by
furtum, theft
galea, helmet
gaudium, joy
gemo, sigh
gens, clan
genus, kind
gero, carry
gesto, carry
gestum, carrying
gigno, bring
glacialis, icy
gladius, sword
gloria, fame
glorior, glory
grassor, go
gratia agere, 
gratia, gratitude
gratia, in
gratulor, wish
gratus, pleasing
gravatus, sick
gravis, heavy
gravitas, weight
graviter, heavily
gravo, oppress
gregatim, in
gregatim, adv
gusto, taste
habeo, have
habui, have
habitum, have
habitus, disposed
hac, this
hactenus, hitherto
hereditas, inheritance
hesito, uncertain
hic, here 
hoc, this
hilaris, cheerful
hinc, from
his, these 
hodie,day
hodiernus, of
honor, honor
honorabilis, respectful
hora, hour
hordeum, ordeum
horrendus, horrible
hortor, exhort
hortus ortus, garden
horum, these
hos, these
hospes, guest
hostes, enemy
huic, this
huius, this
humanitas, kindness
humanus, pertaining
humilis, lowly
humo, cover
humus, ground
hypocrita, hypocrite
iaceo, lie
iacio, throw
iaculum, dart
iam, now
iam, moreover
ianua, door
ibi, there
ictus, blow
idcirco, on
idem, the same
eadem, the same
idem, the same
identidem, again
ideo, for
idoneus, proper
igitur, therefore
ignarus, ignorant
ignavus, lazy
ignis, fire
ignoro, be
ignosco, forgive
ignotus, unknown
ilico, on
illa, that
illacrimo, weep
illas, that
illata, from
illaturos, from
ille, that
illud, that
illiam, that
illic, there
illis, those 
illius, that
illo, that
illorum, those
illuc, thither
illud, that
illusi, mock
illusum, mock
illum, that
imago, image
imber, rain
ymber, rain
imbrium, of
imcomposite, adv
imitabilis, that
imitor, imitate
immanitas, savagery
immerito, adv
immineo, hang
immo, by
immodicus, immoderate
immortalis, immortal
immotus, unmoved
immunda, unclean
immundus, foul
impedimentum, hindrance
impedio, entangle
impedito, a
impedo, entangle
impello, drive
impuli, set
impulsum, set
impendeo, hang
impendium, expenditures
impendo, lay
impenetrabiilis, impenetrable
impensa, expense
imperator, commander
imperceptus, unperceived
imperiosus, imperious
imperium, power
impero, give
impetro, get
impetus, attack
impleo, fill
importo, bring
importunus, unsuitable
impraesentiarum, for
imprimis, especially
improbus, inferior
improvidus, improvident
improviso, unexpected
impudens, impudent
impudenter, impudently
impunitus, unpunished
imputo, lay
in, in
inanis, empty
incassum, in
inceptor, beginner
inceptum, beginning
incertus, uncertain
incido, fall
incipio, take
incito, excite
inclino, bend
includo, shut
inclitus, celebrated
incompositus, disorder
inconsulte, indiscreetly
incontinencia, lack
incorruptus, uncorrupted
incredibilis, incredible
increpare, rebuke
incubo, hang
incurro, run
indagatio, investigation
inde, thence
indebitus, not
indico, proclaim
indigeo, require
indignatio, indignation
indignus, unworthy
indo, establish
indomitus, untamed
induco, cover
induco, bring
inductum, lead
inducas, lead
industria, industry
industrius, industrious
indutiae, truce
inedicabilis, unexplainable
ineptio, play
inexpugnabilis, impregnable
infamo, put
infantia, infancy
infector, dyer
infectus, unworked
infecunditas, barrenness
infecundus, barren
infelicitas, bad
infeliciter, unhappily
infelix, unfruitful
infenso, attack
infensus, hostile
inferi, those
inferne, on
infero, carry
inferus, below
infervesco, come
infeste, in
infesto, attack
infestus, aggressive
inficio, poison 
infeci, poison 
infectum, poison
infidelis, unfaithful
infidelitas, faithlessness
infideliter, faithlessly
infidus, untrue
infigo, fix
infissum, cut
infinitio, eternity
infinitus, unlimited
infirmatio, weakening
infirme, weakly
infirmitas, weakness
infirmo, weaken
infirmus, not
infit, he
infitialis, negative
infitias ire, deny
infitior, deny
inflammatio, setting
inflammo, set
inflatio, inflation
inflatius,o
inflatus, pompous
inflatus, blowing
inflecto, warp
inflectum, bend
infletus, unwept
inflexio, a
inflexus, bending
inflictum, strike
inflo, blow
influo, flow
influi, flow
influxum, flow
infodio, dig
infodi, dig 
infossum, dig
informatio, concept
informis, formless
infortunatus, unfortunate
infortunium, misfortune
infra, low
infula, insignia
ingenium, innate
ingens, of
ingero, go
ingratus, ungrateful
ingravesco, become
inicio, throw
inieci, throw 
iniectum, throw
inimicus, personal
iniquus, unequal
initium, beginning
iniuria, injury
iniustus, unjust
innotesco, innotui
innotesco, become
innuo, give
inolesco, grow
inops, poor
inquis, you
inquit, he
inrideo, laugh
irritus, void
inruo , rush
insania, insanity
insciens, unknowing
inscribo, inscribe
insensatus, irrational
insequor, follow
inservio, be
insideo, sit
insinuo, insinuate
insisto, enter
insolita, unaccustomed
insolitus, unaccustomed
insontis, guiltless
insperatus, unexpected
instanter, urgently
instigo, goad
instituo, establish
insto, pursue
instructus, equipped
instruo, built
instruo, prepare
insula, island
insurgo, rise
insurgi, rise
insurrectum, rise
integer, whole
intellego, understand 
intellexi, understand 
intellectum, understand
intempestivus, untimely
intendo, stretch
intendo, extend
intentio, effort
intentus, thorough
inter, between
interceptum, intercept
interdico, forbid
interdum, sometimes
intereo, perish
interfectum, kill
interrogatio, interrogation
intro, walk
introduco, lead
intueor, look
intumesco, swell
intumesco, sell
intus, within
inultus, unavenged
invado, undertake
invado, assail
invalesco, gather
invenio, come
inventor, inventor
investigo, track
inveteratus, hardened
invetero, give
invicem, one
invictus, unconquer
invideo, envy
invidia, envy
inviso, go
invisus, hated
invito, invite
invitus, unwilling
ioco iocor, joke
iocus, joke
ipse, himself
ipsa, himself
ipsum, himself
ipsemet, his
ira, anger
iratus, angry
iratus, angry
irrito, irritate
irritum, nothingness
irritus, vain
irritus, undecided
is ea id, this
iste, that
ista that
istud, that 
ita, so 
iter , road
itineris, road
itero, repeat
iterum, again
iubeo, order
iussi , order
iussum, order
iucunditas, pleasure
iucundus, agreeable
iudex, judge
iudicium, judgment
iudico, judge
iuge, perpetual
iumentum, beast
iungo , join
iunxi , join
iunctum, join
iuro, swear
iuris , oath
iurandi,  oath
ius iuris, justice 
iustus, just
iuvo, help
iuxta, just
iuxta, close
jaculum, dart
judicium, trial
jugis, ceaseless
jugiter, continually
jumentum, draft
juvenis, young
labefacio , shake
labefeci, shake
labefactum, shake
labefacto, weaken
labes labis, stain
labia, lip
labium,lip
labiosus, having
labo, totter
labor, hardship
labor, labor
lapsus, slip
laboriose, laboriously
laboriosus,ilsome
labrum, lip
labrusca, wild
labruscum, the
lactis, milk
lacero, tear
lacerta, lizard
lacertosus, muscular
lacertus, the
lacesso, harass
lacrima Heliandum, amber
lacrima, tears
lacrimabilis, lamentable
lacrimo, weep
lacrimosus, tearful
lactans, giving
lactatio, enticement
lacteus, milky
lacteus, of
lacto, allure
lactuca, lettuce
lacuna, missing
lacunar, panelled
ledo, strike
lesio, rhetorical
letabilis, joyous
laetans, rejoicing
letatio, rejoicing
letifico, fertilize
letificus, gladdening
letitia, fertility
leto, cheer
letor, rejoice
leve, left
levus, foolish
levus, the
lama, bog
lambo, lick
lamenta, weeping
lamentabilis, lamentable
lamentatio, weeping
lamentor, weep
lamia, witch
lammina, sheet
lapsus, fall
laqueum, noose
laqueus, snare
largior, lavish
lascivio, run
lasesco, become
latus, sides
laudator, praiser
laudo, praise
laus, praise
lebes, copper
lectica, litter
lector, reader
lectus, bed
legatarius, legatee
legatus, deputy
legio, legion
lego, gather
lemma, theme
lenimentus, alleviation
lenio, mitigate
lenis, smooth
lenitudo, smoothness
leno, procurer
lenocinium, enticement
lenocinor, pander
lentis, lentil
lente, slowly
lentesco, become
lentitudo, slowness
lento, bend
lentulus, rather
lentus, lethargic
lentus,ugh
leo, lion
lepide, charmingly
lepidus, charming
lepos, charm
lepus, hare
Lesciense, monastery
letalis, mortal
letaliter, mortally
letanie, litany
lethargus, drowsiness
letifer, deadly
leto, kill
letum, death
levamen, alleviation
levamentum, comfort
levatio, alleviation
leviculus, empty
levidensis, thin
levis, rapid
levis, light
levitas, lightness
leviter, lightly
levo, smooth
levo, raise
lex legis, law
libatio, libation
libellus, little
libenter, willingly
liber, child
liber libri, book
liberalis, courteous
liberalitas, courtesy
liberaliter, courteously
liberatio, release
libere, freely
libero, liberate
libero, lift
libero, set
libertas, freedom
libido, whim
licet, granted 
ligo, bind
lima, file
limen, limina
lingua, language
lino, smear
linteum, linen
liquidus, fluid
litigo, quarrel
littera, letter
loci, places
loco, place
locupleto, enrich
locus, place
loginquitas, distance
lateque, far
longe, far
longus, long 
loquacis, talkative
locutus, say
loricatus, wearing
lubricus, oily
lucerna, lamp
lucror, gain
lucrosus, profitable
lucrum, gain
luctisonus, sad
luctus, lamentation
ludius, actor
ludo, play
lusum, play
ludus, game
lues, plague
lugeo, mourn
luna, moon
lupus, wolf
lux , light
lucis, light
luxuria, luxury
macellarius, butcher
macer, thin
macero, soften
macies, thiness
macresco, become
mactabilis, deadly
macto, magnify
macula, stain
maculo, stain
maculosus, spotted
madesco, get
madide, drunkenly
madidus, wet
mador, wetness
maero, grieve
meror, mourning
magis, more
magister, master
magnus, very 
opere, very
magnus, large
maximus, large
magus, magical
maiestas, majesty 
malens, preferring
malo , choose
mallui, choose 
malus, choose
malum, evil
malus, bad
mancipo, sell
mandatum, order
mando, commit
mane, morning
manentia, permanency
maneo, remain
mansuetus, mild
manus, hand
mare, sea
maris, sea
maritus, husband
mater, mother
materia, material
matertera, maternal
matrimonium, marriage
maxime, greatly
maxime, especially
me, me
medicus, doctor
mediocris, ordinary
meditor, reflect
medius, middle
mei, my
mel, honey
melior, better
mellitus, honeyed
membrana, thin
memini, remember
memor, mindful
memoratus, mentioned
memoria, memory 
mendosus, faulty
mens , mind
mentis, mind
mensa, table
mensis, month
merces, pay 
mercedis, pay
mereo, mereor
mereo, deserve
meretricis, prostitute
meridianus, midday
mestitia, misfortune
metuo, fear
metus, fear
meus, my
mica, crumb
minime, in
minimus, least
ministro, serve
ministro, attend
minor, smaller
minuo , less
minui , less
minutum, less
mire, wonderfully
miro, wonder
miror, marvel
mirus, wonderful
misceo, mix
mixtum, mix
miser, wretched
misere, wretchedly
misereo, misereor
misericordia, pity
missa, holy
mitesco, grow
mitigo, make
mitis, mild
mitto, send
missum, send
modestus, orderly
modica, moderate
modicus, ordinary
modo, now
modus, measure
Moguntienses, 
moleste, take
moleste fero, 
molestia, annoyance
molestus, troublesome
molior, build
mollio, soften
mollis, adj
monachus, monk
Monasteriense, 
monasterium, monastery
moneo, warn
monitio, admonition
mons montis, mountain
monstro, show
monstrum, portent
Montensem, 
mora, delay
moratlis, mortal
morbus, sickness
mores, morium
morior, die
mortis, death
morsus, a
mortifera, deadly
mortuus, dead
mos moris, will
moveo , move
moti , move
motum, move
mox, soon
mucro, a
mugio, groan
mulier, woman
multi, many
multo, by
multum, much
multus, ne
multus, much
multus , much
plus , much
plurimum, much
mundo, clean
mundus, world
mundus, clean
munero, give
munimentum, fortification
munio, fortify
munitio, fortifying
munus, service
mus, mouse
mussito, grumble
mutatio, change
muto, change
muto, punish
mutuo, borrowed
mutuus, interchanged
mutuus, a loan 
narro, make
nascor , born
nasci , born
natus, born
natalis , birthday
natalis, birthday
natio, nation
natura, nature
nauta, sailor
navigatio, voyage
navigo, sail
navis , ship
navis, ship
ne, not
necessarius, necessary
necne, or not
neco, kill
nefas, wrong
nego, deny
negotium, employment
nemo, no
neo, spin
nepotis, grandson
nequam, worthless
nequaquam, by no means
neque, neither
nequeo, not
nequities, worthlessness
nescio, be
nichilominus, nevertheless
nidor, vapor
niger, black
nihil, nothing
nihilum, nothing
nisi, unless
niteo, shine
nitesco, begin
nitor, strive
nitor, rest
nitor, brilliance 
niveus, white
no, swim
nobis, us
nocens, bad
nocte, night
nolo, refuse
nolle, refuse
nomen, name
nominatim, by
non, not
nondum, not
nonnisi, not
nonnullus, some
nonnumquam, sometimes
nonus, ninth
nos, we
nos, us
nosco, become
noster , our
nostris, our
nostra , our
nostrum, our
nota, mark
notarius, stenographer
novem, nine
novitas, newness
novo, make
novus, novel
novus, new
nox , night
noctis, night
nullus, not
numerus,number
numquam, never
nunc, now
nunquam, never
nuntio, announce
nuntius, messenger
nuper, newly
nusquam, nowhere
nutrimens, food
nutrimentus, nourishment
nutrio, suckle
nutus, command
obdormio, fall
obduro, be
obicio, offer
obiectum, offer
obligatus, bound
obliquo, turn
oblittero, cancel
oblivio, forgetfulness
obruo, overwhelm
obsequium, indulgence
obstinatus, firm
obtestor, implore
obtineo, hold
obviam ire, 
obviam, on
obvius, on
occasio, favorable
occido , fall
occidi , fall
occasum, fall
occulto, secretly
occupo, take
occurro, fall
occursus, meeting
ocius, quick
oculus, eye
odio, hate
odium, hatred
offensio, striking
offero, bring
officina, workshop
officium, duty
olim, once
omitto, omit
omnigenus, of
omnino, altogether
omnipotens, all
omnis, all
omnes, all
onero, load
onus, load
opera, work
operor, work
opes, means
opinio, opinion
opisthotonos, 
oporotheca, place
oportet, it
oportunitas, convenience
oppono , set
opposui , set
oppositum, set
opportune, conveniently
opportunitas, fitness
opportunus, opportune
opportunus, fit
oppressum, suppress
opprobrium, reproach
oppugno, fight
ops, singular
optimates, the
optimus: aristocrat
opto, desire
opus operis, work
oratio, speech
orator, orator
orbis, circle
ordinatio, rule
ordine, ordinem
ordo, rank
orior , rise
oriri , rise
ortus, rise
ornatus, dress
orno, equip
oro, speak
os, oris
ostendo, show
ostium, entrance
otium, free
otium, ease
ovis , sheep
ovis, sheep
paciscor, make
pactum, treaty
pactum, agreement
pactus, agreed
paene, pene
paganus, countryman
pala, spade
palam, openly
palea, chaff
pallium, coverlet
palma, palm
pando, stretch
panis, bread
panem, bread
par, equal
paratus, prepared
parens , parent
parentis, parent
pareo, obey
paries, wall
parilis, similar
pario, bear
pariter, equally
paro, prepare
pars , part
partis, part
partim, partly
pasco, graze
passer, sparrow
patefacio, disclose
pateo, plain
pater , father
patris, father
paternus, native
patiens, patient
patientia, patience
patior, suffer
patria, fatherland
patrocinor, protect
patronus, patron
patruus, paternal
pauci, few
paulatim, gradually
pauper, beggar
pauper, poor
paupertas, beggardry
pax pacis, peace
peccatus, sin
pecco, do
pecto, comb
pectus , heart
pectoris, heart
pecunia, money
peior, worse
pello , hit
pepulli , hit
pulsum, hit
pendeo, hang
pendo, weigh
penitus, inward
penus, us
per, because
peracto, carry
peragro, wander
percipio , gain
percepi , gain
perceptum, gain
percontor, inquire
perculsus, a shock
percutio, strike
perdignus, very
perdo, destroy
perduco, lead
peregrinus, wanderer
pereo, pass
perfectus, complete
perfero, bear
perfruor, execute
perfusus, steeped
pergo, continue
periclitatus, put
periclitor, test
periculosus, hazardous
periculum, danger
perimo , destroy
peremptum, destroy
peritus, skilled
periurium, perjury
perlustro, pass
permitto , allow
permissi , allow
permissum, allow
permoveo, excite
perniciosus, pernicious
perperam, wrongly
perpetro, complete
perpetuus, perpetual
perscitus, very
perscribo, write
perseco, cut
persequor , follow
persequi, follow 
persecutus, follow
perseverantia, perseverance
persevero, persist
persisto, persist
persolvo, unloose
perspicuus, transparent
perterreo, terrify
pertimesco, become
pertinacia, firmness
pertinaciter, stubbornly
pertinax, persistent
pertineo, pertain
pertingo, stretch
pertorqueo, twist
pertraho, drag
perturbo, disturb
perturpis, very
peruro , burn
perussi , burn
perustum, burn
pervalidus, very
perverto , turn
perverti , turn
perversum, turn
pervideo , look
pervidi , look
pervisum, look
pes , foot
pedis, foot
pessimus, worst
pessum, downward
pestifere, destructively
pestis , plague
pestis, plague
petitus, inclining
peto, make
peto, ask
phasmatis, ghost
phitonicum, 
pia , honest
pium, honest
pica, jay
picea, the
pictor, painter
pictoratus, painted
piger , lazy
pigra , lazy
pigrum, lazy
pignus, pawn
piper, piperis
pipio, chirp
pirum, pear
pirus, pear
piscator, fisherman
piscis , fish
piscis, fish
pius,  godly 
placet, it
placide, quitely
placidus, quiet
placitum, judgment
placitum, accord
placo, placate
plaga, district
plagiarius, kid
plane, plainly
plango , strike
planxi , strike
plactum, strike
platea, street
plaustrum, wagon
plebs, masses 
plebis, masses
plecto, punish
plector, be punished
plene, completely
plenus, full
plerumque, for
plerusque, very
plico, fold
plorabilis, deplorable
ploratus, weeping
ploro, lament
pluit pluvit, it
pluma, feather
plumbeus, leaden
plumbum album, tin
plumbum, lead
pluo, rain
plura, more
plures, more
plurimi, at
plurimus, most
plus, more
plusculus, somewhat
pluvia, rain
pluvialis, pertaining
pocius , rather
potius, rather
poema poematis, poem
poena, pain 
polenta, pearl
polleo, able
pollex, thumb
polliceor, promise
pollicitus, promised
pomum, fruit
pono , lay
posui , lay
positum, lay
pons , bridge
pontis, bridge
poposco, see
populus, people
porro, forward
porta, gate
posco, call
positus, position
possessio, possession
possum , avail
posse , avail
potum, avail
post, after
postea, afterwards
posteri, posterity
posterus, postremo
postpono, put
postulo, ask
potens, able
potestas, power
potissimus, best
potius, rather
prae , before
pre, before
praebeo, offer
praecedo, precede
precelsus, exceedingly
praecepio, precep
praecipio, precipio
precipuus: excellent
praeclarus, excellent
precox, ripe
preda, plunder 
predico, warn
preeo, go
prefero, carry
prefero, anticipate
prefeci , put
prefectum, put
prefinio, appoint 
prefoco, choke
pregravo, press
praemitto, send
premium, reward
premo, press
praenuntius, foretelling
prepono, set
presentia, presence
presencia, power
presidium, guard
prestans, excellent
prestantia: superiority
praesto, stand
presto, answer
praesul, dancer
presumo, anticipate
praeter, beyond
preterea, besides
pretereo, pass
preteritus, past
pretermissio, neglect
pretergredior, pass
prevenio
pravitas, crookedness
precipio, anticipate
precipue, chiefly
precor, pray
prehendo, seize 
pressum, squeeze
prenda, booty
pretereo, go
pretium, price
prevenire, come
precis, request
primitus, first
primo, first
primoris, first
primum, quam
primum, at
princeps, chief
principatus, rule
principium, beginning
prior prius, former
priscus, ancient
pristinus, former
prius, before
privatus, private
privigna, step
privo, deprive 
pro, because of
probitas, probity
probo, show
procedo, go
procella, storm
procer, chief
procinctu, prepared
procul, far
procurator, manager
prodigiosus, unnatural
proditor, traitor
proelium, battle
profecto, truly
profero, carry
proficio, make
proficio, advance
proficiscor, depart
proficuus, proficiscor
profiteor,confess
profor , speak
profari , speak
profatus, speak
profugus, fleeing
profusum, pour
profundus, deep
progener, husband
progenero, produce
progenies, descent
progenitor, founder
progenitum, engender
prognatus, born
progredior, go
progressio, advance
progressus, advance
prohibeo, prevent
prohibitio, prohibition
proicio, throw
proinde, consequently
prolabor, slide
prolato, enlarge
prolecto, entice
proles, offspring
prolixi, lure
prolix, long
prolixus, wide
proloquor, speak
prolutum, wash
prolusio, preliminary
proluvier, inundation
promereo promereor, deserve
promeritum, desserts
prominens, jutting
promineo, stand
promisce promiscue, indiscriminately
promiscuus, mixed
promitto, let
promitto, let
promo, produce
promontorium, peak
promotum, push
prompte, promptly
promptu, display 
promptus, ready
promulgatio, publication
promus, steward
pronepos, great
pronuntio, proclaim
prope, near
propello, drive
propero, hasten
propinquus, near
propono, display
proprie, exclusively
proprius, special
propter, because of
propugnaculum, fortification
prorsus, forward
prosequor, attack
prosper, favorable
prosperitas, prosperity
protestor, protesto
protinus, forward
protraho,  protract
prout, just
provectus, advanced
proveho, carry
provideo, foresee
provisor, one
proximus, nearest
prudens, prudent
prudenter, wisely
prudentia, foresight
puchre, beautifully
pudendus, shameful
pudicus, modest
pudor, modesty
puella, girl
puer, boy
puerilis, childish
pueriliter, boyishly
puga pyga, buttocks
pugna, fight
pugnaculum, fortress
pugnax, fond
pugno, fight
pulchellus, pretty
pulchrum, beautiful
pulchritudinis, beauty
pullulo, shoot
pullus, dark
pullus, young
pulmentum, anything
pulmo, the
pulpa, flesh
pulpitum, platform
pulso, strike
pulsus, beating
pulsus, beating
pulvis, dust 
punctum, penetrate
pupugi, prick
puniceus, purple
punio, punish
punitor, punisher
pupa, doll
pupillus , orphan
pupilla, orphan
puppis, stern
pupula, pupil
purgamentum, rubbish
purgatio,  cleansing
purgo, clean
purpura, purple
purus, pure
pusillus, tiny
putator, pruner
puteo, stink
puter, rotten
putesco, putrefy
puteus, well
puto, clear
putus, pure
pyropus, bronze
pyus , casket
qua, where
quadraginta, forty
quadratus, square
quadrigae, four
quadrivium, second
quadrivium, crossroads
quadrum, square
quae, who
quero, seek
quaesitio, investigation
queso, seek
quaestio, seeking
quaestuosus, profitable
quaestus, profit
qualitas, quality
quam, which
quamdiu, such
quamobrem, quam
quamquam, nevertheless 
quandoquidem, since
quanti, for how much
quanto, by how much
quantum, amount
quapropter, wherefore
quare, wherefore
quartus, fourth
quasi, sort of
quasso, shake
quatinus, since
quater, four
quattuor, four
quercus, oak
querella, complaint
queribundus, complaining
querimonia, complaint
queritor, complain
quernus, oaken
queror, complain
querulus, complaining
qui, that
quia, because
quibus, which
quicquid, whoever
quid, what
quidem, indeed
quies quietis, quiet
quilibet, anyone
quin, indeed
quinam , which
quaenam , which
quenam , which
quodnam, which
quingenti, five
quinquennis, five
quippe, certainly
quisnam, quidnam
quisquam, anyone
quisque, each
quisquis, whoever
quo, which
quod, because
quondam, formerly
quoniam, since
quoque, also
quorum, of which
quot, how
quotidianum, daily
quotiens, often
quotienscumque, however
quovis, whatever
radicitus, by
ratum, seize
rarus, rare
ratio, system
ratio, reckoning
recedo, go
receptum, go
recito, read
recognosco, recognize
recolo, recall
recolo, cultivate
recolo, reflect
reconcilio, restore
recondo, lay
recordatio, recollection
recordor, remember
recro, recreate
rectum, virtue
rectus, right
recuperatio, recovery
recupero, regain
recuso, refuse
redarguo, refute
redarguo, disprove
reddo, repeat
reddo, give
redemptio, ransoming
redemptor, redeemer
redeo, go
redeo, fall
redigo, bring
redono, give
reduco, lead
redundantia, overflowing
redundo, overflow
refectory, mess hall
refero, bring
reformo, form
regina, queen
regius, royal
regnum, rule
rectum, guide
regula, rule
relaxo, loosen
relectum, read
relevo, lift
relictus, 
relinquo, leave
reliquum, remainder
relucesco, become
reluctor, struggle
remando, send
remaneo, stay
remaneo, remain
rememdium, cure
removeo, draw
remuneror, repay
renuntio, declare
renuo, deny
rependo, ransom
repens, sudden
repente, suddenly
repere, crawl
reperio, get
repetitio, repetition
repeto, seek
repeto, return
repleo, replenish
repletus, filled
repo, creep
reptum, creep
repono, deposit
reprehendo, blame
repugno, fight
requietum, rest
requiro, ask
res rei, thing
resisto, resist
respicio, look
responsum, answer
restituo, restore
resumo, repeat
retineo, hold
retractum, draw
retribuo, give
reus, defendant
revenio, come
reverto, go
reverti , return
reversus, return
revoco, call
revolvo, unroll
rex rgis, king
rhetor, rhetorician
rhetoricus, rhetorical
risum, laugh
rigor, stiffness
ritus, usage
rogo, ask
rostrum, bill
rota, wheel
rotundus, wheel
rubor, redness
rudimentum, trial
rumor, rumor
rutum, rush
rursus, on
rusticus, rustic
sabbatum, sabbath
sacculus, purse
sacrificum, sacrifice
sacrilegus, sacrilegious
sepe, hedge
sepe, often
saepenumero, repeated
sepius, often
saeta, hair
saevio, rage
sal , sal
salis, salt
salsus, salty
saltem, at
salus, health
saluto, wish
salutor, visitor
salveo, be
salvus, safe
sanctifico, sanctify
sanctimonia, purity
sanctimonialis, nun 
sanctus, holy
sanctificetur, holy
sane, rationally
sanitas, health
sano, heal 
sanus, sound 
sapiens, wise
sapienter, wisely
sapientia, wisdom
sarcina, bundle
satago, pay
satago, have
satio, satisfy
satis, enough
sato, sow
satura, satire
saturo, fill
scaber, scabby
scabies, the
scamnum, bench
sceleratus, wicked
scelero, pollute
scelestus, wicked
sceleris, crime
schola, school
scientia, knowledge
scilicet, evidently
scindo, cut
scitum, know
scio, know
scisco, investigate
scribo, scripsi
scrinium, bookcase
scriptor, writer
secedo, go
secretum, separate
secundus, second
securus, safe
secus, non
secus, otherwise
secuutus, follower
sed, but
sessum, sit
seditio, dissension
sedo, settle
seductor, seducer
semper, always
senectus, old
senis, old
sensus, feeling
sententia, opinion
sentio, judge
sentio, feel
seorsum, apart
sepelio, ruin
septem, seven
sepulchrum, grave
seputus, buried
sequax, following
secutus, follow
serio, seriously
serius, serious
sermo, talk
sermo, discussion
sero, sow 
servitus, servitude
servo, watch
servus, slave
severitas, severity
si, if
sibimet, them
sic, so
siccus, dry
Siclinium, 
sicut, as
sidus, constellation
signum, sign
silens, silent
silenti etc, the
silentium, silence
sileo, be
siligo, wheat
silva, woods
similis, similar
similitudo, likeness
simplex, simple
simul atque, as
simul, at
simulatio, pretense
sine, without
singularis, alone
singuli, one
singultim, stammeringly
singultus, sobbing
singulus, single
sino, allow
siquidem, since
sitio, be
sitis, thirst
sive seu, or
socer, father
socius, sharing
socius, partner
sodalitas, fellowship
sol , sun
solis, sun
soleo, be
solitudinis, loneliness
solium, chair
sollers, clever
sollicito, stir
sollicitudo, uneasiness
sollicitudo, concern
sollicitus, uneasy
sollicitus, troubled
solum, land
solus, alone
solutio, loosening
solvo, loosen
somniculosus, sleepy
somniculouse, sleepily
somnio, dream
somnium, dream
somnus, sleep
sonitus, noise
sono, sing
sophismata, false
sopor, deep
sordeo, be
sordes, filth
sordesco, become dirty
sortitus, casting
sparsum, scatter
speciosus, beautiful
spectaculum, spectacle
specto, look
speculum, mirror
specus, cave
spretum, scorn
spero, hope
spes, hope
spiculum, sharp
spiritus, breath
spoliatio, plundering
spolio, strip
spolium, spoils
sponte, willingly
stabilis, firm
stabilitas, firmness
statim, firmly
statua, statue
statuo, give
statuo, cause
stella, star
stillicidium, dripping
stipes, itis
stipes, log
stips, stipis
strenuus, brisk
strues, piles
studio, study
studiose, eagerly
studium, eagerness
stultus, foolish
suadeo, recommend
suasoria, persuasive
sub, under
subito, adv
subitus, sudden
subiungo, yoke
sublime, on
subnecto, bind
subseco, cut
subsequor, follow
substantia, substance
subvenio, come
subvenio, come
succedo, approach
succendo, kindle
successio, succeeding
succurro, run
sufficio, be
suffoco, strangle
suffragium, vote
suggero, bring
sui, himself
sulum, each
sum fui futurus, be
summa, sum
summisse, humbly
summissus, lowered
summopere, very much
sumo, take
sumptus, expense
supellectilis, furniture
super, above 
superbia, pride
superbus, overbearing
superficies, surface
superfluo, flow
superna, northeast
superne, from
supernus, above
supero, overcome
supersum, remain
supervacuus, superfluous
suppellectilus, ornaments
suppellex, household
supplanto, trip
supplex, kneeling
supplicium, punishment
subpono, subject
supra, above
surculus, shoot
sursum, upwards
suscipio, raise
suscito, stir
suspensum, suspend
sustineo, hold
suus , their
sua, their
suum, their
synagoga, synagogue
tabella, writing
tabellae, letter
tabernus, booth
tabesco, melt
tactum, touch
tabula, board
tactus, sense
taedium, tedium
talis, such
talus, ankle
tam, so
tamen, notwithstanding
tametsi, although
tamisium, sieve
tandem, finally
tantum, only
tantummodo, only
tardus, slow
te, you 
tectum, cover
temeritas, rashness
temperantia, moderation
tempero, mix
tempero, spare
tempestas, storm
templum, sacred
temptatio, trial
tempus temporis, time
tenax, grasping
tendo, direct
tendo, direct
teneo, keep
teneo, hold
teneo, grasp
tenerum, tender
tentationem, trial
tenuis, thin
tenus, prep
tepesco, cool
tepidus, warm
ter, three
terebro, bore
teres, rounded
terga dare, flee
tersum, wipe
tergiversatio, backwardness
tergo, in the rear
tergum, skin
tergus, hide
terminatio, termination
termino, restrict
terminus, limit
tritum, rub
terra, earth
terreo, frighten
territo, scare
terror, fright
tersus, clean
tertius, third
testimonium, proof
testis, one
texo, weave
texo, the
textilis, woven
textrix, weaver
textus, woven
thalassinus, sea
theatrum, theater
theca, case
thematis, theme
thema, subject
theologus, theologian
thermae, warm
thesaurus, treasure
thesis, proposition
thorax, breastplate
timeo, fear
timidus, fearful
timor, fear
titulus, label
tolero, tolerate
sublatum, lift
tonsum, shave
tonsor, barbar
torqueo, twist
torrens, rushing
totidem, just
toties,ties
toties,tiens
toties, often
totus, whole
tracto, drag
traditum, surrender
tractum, drag
trans, across
transeo, go
translatum, carry
transmitto, send
tremo, tremble
trepide, with
tres , three
tria, three
tribuo, give
tricesimus, thirtieth
triduana, lasting
tripudio, leap
tristis, sad
triumphus, triumphal
trucido, kill 
tu, you
tua, your
tubineus, cone
tui, your
tum, at
tumultus, uprising
tumulus, mound
tunc, then
turba, uproar
turbatio, disturbance
turbatus, angered
turbo, disturb
turpis, foul
tutaminis, defense
tutis, protected
tuum, your
tyrannus, tyrant
uberrime, most
ubi, where
ulciscor, take
ullus, any
ulterius, farther
ultio ultionis, avenging
ultra, beyond
umbra, shade
humerus, shoulder
umquam, ever
una, in one
unde, whence
undique, from
universe, generally
universi, all
universitas, the
universum, universe
universus, combined
unus, one
urbanus, urban
urbis, city
uredo, a
us, foreign
usitas, customary
usque, all
ustilo, burn
ustulo, burn
usus, use
ut, so that
uterque, both
utilis, useful
utilitas, utility
utique, at
usus, use
utpote, seeing
utrimque, from
utroque, both
utrum, whether
uxor, wife
vacuus, empty
vado, go 
valde, intensely
valens, strong
valetudo, health
validus, strong
vallum, palisade
vapulus, flogged
varietas, variety
varius, various
vehemens, violent
vehementer, violently
vel, or
velociter, quickly
velox, quick
velum, sail
venia, grace
venio , come
veni , come
ventum, come
ventito, come
ventosus, full
ventus, wind
ventus, wind
venustas, loveliness
ver, veris
verbera, 
verbum, word
vere, truly
verecundia, feeling
vereor, respect
vergo, bend
veritas, truth
Vernandense, 
vero, in
versus, line
verto, turn
verto, flee
verumptamen, notwithstanding
verus, true
vesco, vescor
vesica, bladder
vesper, evening
vespera, evening
vespillo, undertaker
vestigium, footstep
vestitum, clothe
vestis, clothing
vestrum , your
vestri, your
vetus, old
via, road
vicinus, neighbor
vicissitudo, change
victor, victor
victoria, victory
victus, living
videlicet, namely
vidi , see
visum, see
videor, be
viduata, deprived
viduo, deprive
vigilo, be
vigor, vigor
vilicus, villicus
vilis, cheap
vilitas, cheapness
villa, country
vinco , conquer
vici , conquer
victum, conquer
vinculum, bond
vindico , claim
vindico, liberate
vindico, avenge
vinitor, vine
vinum, wine
vir, man
virga, a
virgo, maiden
viridis, green
viriliter, manfully
virtus, manliness
vis, 
vis vires, 
viscus, flesh
vita, life
vitiosus, vicious
vitium, fault
vito, avoid
vivo , live
victum, live
vix, scarcely 
vociferor, cry
voco, call
volaticus, winged
volatilis,  flying
volens, willing
volo, mean
volo, fly
volo, wish
volubilis, rolling
volubiliter, fluently
voluntarius, voluntary
voluntas, wish
voluntas, last
volup, agreeably
voluptarius, pleasant
voluptas, pleasure
voluptuosus, delightful
volutabrum, pigsty
volva vulva, womb
vomer, plowshare
vomica, ulcer
vomito, vomit
vorago, chasm
vorax, gluttonous
voro, eat
vos, you
votum, promise
vox , voice
vocis, voice
vulariter, in
vulgaris, common
vulgivagus, wandering
vulgo, spread
vulnero, wound
vulnus, wound
volpes, fox
vulticulus, look
vultuosus, grimacing
volturius, vulture
vultus, expression
xiphias, sword
